---
title: "451. Navigating Belief, Skepticism, and the Afterlife | Alex O&#39;Connor"
draft: false
publisher: "[[The Jordan B. Peterson Podcast]]"
published_date: 2024-05-23
tags:
---


## Highlights
* [[2024-11-04]] 20:31  Alex has interviewed many of the people that I'm interested in, including Richard Dawkins. And he is very interested in religious matters, although he's not a Christian. And we believed jointly that it would be useful for us to meet and to hash out our differences in viewpoint and similarities and see if we could get together and move together somewhere valuable and enlightening. And so that's what we're trying to do. That's what we try to do with the conversation. It focuses mostly on the nature of belief. I suppose that's probably the easiest way to sum it up.

* [[2024-11-04]] 20:31  Nobody wants to engage in that all the time. I think there are times when it's worth doing. And to be clear, I still like to disagree and do so essentially unapologetically and bluntly, and that can still come across as quite rude. But I think that the way that I would think about a conversation is that, well, what are we about to do here? A debate.

* [[2024-11-04]] 20:30  Dawkins formulated the idea of meme, which is, by the way, the same idea as archetype. It's exactly the same idea, except he just stopped. It's like, okay, there are memes, they're selected for. Okay, selected on what basis exactly? Does that mean There's a hierarchy of memes. Are the memes more likely that. Are the memes that are conserved more likely to be. What would you say? Viable organisms? And if they're viable organisms, are they microcosms? This is really interesting in terms of the survivability, because there's a point

* [[2024-11-04]] 20:30  Yeah, Right. And now I asked Richard Dawkins about the evolution argument against naturalism. I said, well, how can you know that what you believe is true? And he said, because believing true things makes me more likely to survive. Hey, hey, boy, watch where you go with that. I didn't catch it at the time, but I thought to myself afterwards it was. One of my commenters on Patreon actually had mentioned this. He was listening to Richard. And I said, but, you know, but okay, maybe. But sometimes it's at least possible that something that's false helps you to survive.

